---
title: Putting Science back in Computer Science
tags: ["meta"]
date: 2019-09-13
feature_image: "/images/science-in-cs.jpg"
summary: "Its time we drop the titles of developers, coders, programmers, etc.
Because building complex, mission-critical, computing infrastructure involves
much more than that. It is needs to be more rigourous."
---

I created this website to write and think about mathematics, physics,
computation and the interface between these three disciplines. I am an engineer
by trade, but lately I am getting more and more worried about the direction
towards which this Industry is heading. This is what I call "Computers for
computer's sake". When you see a culture where computer programming is treated
like an "Art" more than rigid Science, things are ripe for battle. The war
between vim and emac, between hard tabs and spaces, frameworks vs libraries,
Windows vs UNIX, and countless other battles that have wasted valuable human
hours and effort.  

I want to use computers to solve useful problems. Learning about linear algebra,
simulating collisions of galaxies, deigning and studying self-organizing
behavior, that kind of thing. I want to turn off this white-noise of buzzwords
and fanaticism. I want to build something worthwhile.  

## Control
We created computers to make human lives easier. These systems are fast,
accurate and they don't get tired easily. In our arrogance (and laziness), we
kept on adding layers upon layers of abstraction. Thinking it would make things
easier for humans, when in reality we unnecessarily added complexity and then
shoved it under a rug.  

Because we created these system, we reasoned that we had complete control over
them. The complexity is man-made so surely man can handle it. Wrong. No one saw
spectre or meltdown coming. No one predicted that one work around to improve CPU
performance will have consequences. No one knew that emulating an ancient floppy
drive could result in VENOM. In our ignorance, we looked at the harsh reality
and rationalized it away. The reality that chaos is just as real for a man-made
double pendulum as it is for global weather.  

## Equilibrium
Something really interesting happens when we are honest with ourselves about
reality. If we face harsh reality voluntarily, and try not to cheat it, our
systems show robustness and reliability. If we are humble enough to
conceptualize that our security is not perfect, we will be prepared for the
inevitable data breach. If we realize that slicing cake won't create more of it,
we actually invest in better hardware rather than over-prescripting existing
ones. I hope to serve my clients in maintaining this delicate balance between
the cold well-ordered realm of Numbers and Ideal cases, and that hot and cruel
mess which is Reality itself.  
